Rhinoceros
==========

A rhinoceros (from Greek rhinokeros, meaning 'nose-horned', from rhinos,
meaning 'nose', and kerato/keras, meaning 'horn'), commonly abbreviated
to 'rhino', is one of any five extant species of odd-toed ungulates in
the family Rhinocerotidae, as well as any of the numerous extinct
species. Two of the extant species are native to Africa and three to
Southern Asia. The term "rhinoceros" is often more broadly applied to
now extinct relatives of the superfamily Rhinocerotoidea.

Members of the rhinoceros family are some of the largest remaining
megafauna, with all species able to reach or exceed one tonne in weight.
They have a herbivorous diet, small brains (400–600 g) for mammals of
their size, one or two horns, and a thick (1.5–5 cm) protective skin
formed from layers of collagen positioned in a lattice structure. They
generally eat leafy material, although their ability to ferment food in
their hindgut allows them to subsist on more fibrous plant matter when
necessary. Unlike other perissodactyls, the two African species of
rhinoceros lack teeth at the front of their mouths, relying instead on
their lips to pluck food.\[1\]

Rhinoceros are killed by some humans for their horns, which are bought
and sold on the black market, and used by some cultures for ornaments or
traditional medicine. East Asia, specifically Vietnam, is the largest
market for rhino horns. By weight, rhino horns cost as much as gold on
the black market. People grind up the horns and consume them, believing
the dust has therapeutic properties.\[2\]\[3\] The horns are made of
keratin, the same type of protein that makes up hair and
fingernails.\[4\] Both African species and the Sumatran rhinoceros have
two horns, while the Indian and Javan rhinoceros have a single horn. The
IUCN Red List identifies the Black, Javan, and Sumatran rhinoceros as
critically endangered.

Taxonomy and naming
-------------------

The word rhinoceros is derived through Latin from the Ancient Greek:
pivokepac, which is composed of pivo- (rhino-, "nose") and kepac (keras,
"horn"). The plural in English is rhinoceros or rhinoceroses. The
collective noun for a group of rhinoceroses is crash or herd. The name
has been in use since the 14th century.\[6\]

The family Rhinocerotidae consists of only four extant genera:
Ceratotherium (White rhinoceros), Dicerorhinus (Sumatran rhinoceros),
Diceros (Black rhinoceros) and Rhinoceros (Indian and Javan rhinoceros).
The living species fall into three categories. The two African species,
the white rhinoceros and the black rhinoceros, belong to the tribe
Dicerotini, which originated in the middle Miocene, about 14.2 million
years ago. The species diverged during the early Pliocene (about 5
million years ago). The main difference between black and white rhinos
is the shape of their mouths – white rhinos have broad flat lips for
grazing, whereas black rhinos have long pointed lips for eating foliage.
There are two living Rhinocerotini species, the Indian rhinoceros and
the Javan rhinoceros, which diverged from one another about 10 million
years ago. The Sumatran rhinoceros is the only surviving representative
of the most primitive group, the Dicerorhinini, which emerged in the
Miocene (about 20 million years ago).\[7\]

A subspecific hybrid white rhino (Ceratotherium s. simum × C. s.
cottoni) was bred at the Dvůr Králové Zoo (Zoological Garden Dvur
Kralove nad Labem) in the Czech Republic in 1977. Interspecific
hybridisation of black and white rhinoceros has also been
confirmed.\[8\]

While the black rhinoceros has 84 chromosomes (diploid number, 2N, per
cell), all other rhinoceros species have 82 chromosomes. However,
chromosomal polymorphism might lead to varying chromosome counts. For
instance, in a study there were three northern white rhinoceroses with
81 chromosomes.\[9\]

Characteristics
---------------

### White rhinoceros

There are two subspecies of white rhinoceros: the southern white
rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum simum) and the northern white rhinoceros
(Ceratotherium simum cottoni). As of 2013, the southern subspecies has a
wild population of 20,405 – making them the most abundant rhino
subspecies in the world. However, the northern subspecies is critically
endangered, with all that is known to remain being two captive females.
There is no conclusive explanation of the name "white rhinoceros". A
popular idea that "white" is a distortion of either the Afrikaans word
wyd or the Dutch word wijd (or its other possible spellings whyde, weit,
etc.,), meaning "wide" and referring to the rhino's square lips, is not
supported by linguistic studies.\[10\]\[11\]

The white rhino has an immense body and large head, a short neck and
broad chest. Females weigh 1,600 kg (4,000 lb) and males 2,400 kg (5,000
lb). The head-and-body length is 3.5–4.6 m (11–15 ft) and the shoulder
height is 1.8–2 m (5.9–6.6 ft). On its snout it has two horns. The front
horn is larger than the other horn and averages 90 cm (35 in) in length
and can reach 150 cm (59 in). The white rhinoceros also has a prominent
muscular hump that supports its relatively large head. The colour of
this animal can range from yellowish brown to slate grey. Most of its
body hair is found on the ear fringes and tail bristles, with the rest
distributed rather sparsely over the rest of the body. White rhinos have
the distinctive flat broad mouth that is used for grazing.\[10\]

### Black rhinoceros

The name "black rhinoceros" (Diceros bicornis) was chosen to distinguish
this species from the white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum). This can
be confusing, as the two species are not truly distinguishable by color.
There are four subspecies of black rhino: South-central (Diceros
bicornis minor), the most numerous, which once ranged from central
Tanzania south through Zambia, Zimbabwe and Mozambique to northern and
eastern South Africa; South-western (Diceros bicornis occidentalis)
which are better adapted to the arid and semi-arid savannas of Namibia,
southern Angola, western Botswana and western South Africa; East African
(Diceros bicornis michaeli), primarily in Tanzania; and West African
(Diceros bicornis longipes) which was declared extinct in November
2011.\[12\] The native Tswanan name keitloa describes a South African
variation of the black rhino in which the posterior horn is equal to or
longer than the anterior horn.\[13\]

An adult black rhinoceros stands 1.50–1.75 m (59–69 in) high at the
shoulder and is 3.5–3.9 m (11–13 ft) in length.\[14\] An adult weighs
from 850 to 1,600 kg (1,870 to 3,530 lb), exceptionally to 1,800 kg
(4,000 lb), with the females being smaller than the males. Two horns on
the skull are made of keratin with the larger front horn typically 50 cm
long, exceptionally up to 140 cm. Sometimes, a third smaller horn may
develop.\[15\] The black rhino is much smaller than the white rhino, and
has a pointed mouth, which it uses to grasp leaves and twigs when
feeding.

During the latter half of the 20th century, their numbers were severely
reduced from an estimated 70,000\[16\] in the late 1960s to a record low
of 2,410 in 1995. Since then, numbers have been steadily increasing at a
continental level with numbers doubling to 4,880 by the end of 2010.
Current numbers are however still 90% lower than three generations
ago.\[17\]
